The Anatomy of an AI Agreement: A Syntax Breakdown of AgentSLA

1. Introduction: From Models to Managed Agents

The software industry is undergoing a fundamental shift from "Model-as-a-Service" (MaaS)—where Large Language Models (LLMs) act as passive responders—to "Agent-as-a-Service" (AaaS). In this new paradigm, AI agents function as autonomous collaborators capable of refining their own processes and making independent decisions.

Because agents are non-deterministic and autonomous, traditional Service Level Agreements (SLAs) designed for static infrastructure are insufficient. To bridge this gap, the AgentSLA domain-specific language (DSL) was developed. It extends the global ISO/IEC 25010 standard for software quality, introducing new characteristics like Sustainability and Understandability to ensure AI behavior remains predictable and ethical.

Feature	Traditional Software SLAs (ISO 25010)	AI Agent SLAs (AgentSLA Extension)
Primary Focus	Performance, Availability, Security	Autonomy, Fairness, Output Properties
Quality Dimensions	Uptime, Latency, Throughput	Understandability (Accountability, Transparency), Sustainability
Nature of Logic	Deterministic (Predictable outputs)	Non-deterministic (Probabilistic outputs)
Metric Baseline	Static Infrastructure Metrics	Output Properties (Conciseness, Creativity, Consistency)

This structural shift requires a formal syntax to define these expectations, which is where the AgentSLA DSL provides a rigorous framework for enforcement.

2. The Foundation: The Guarantee Term

In AgentSLA, the GuaranteeTerm is the fundamental unit of the agreement. It serves as the "anchor" that binds a specific requirement to a specific entity under specific conditions. Following a "first-principles" architectural approach, every GuaranteeTerm is composed of three mandatory sub-components that "bracket" the AI’s behavior:

* Scope: The identification of the specific agent or model governed by the term.
* Qualifying Conditions: The "preconditions" (Boolean expressions) that must be met for the term to become active. For example, a latency requirement might only apply if the input prompt is under 500 tokens.
* Service Level Objectives (SLOs): The core "promises"—the specific thresholds or goals the service provider guarantees to maintain.

Why this matters to a developer: By separating the when (Qualifying Conditions) from the what (SLOs), developers can create highly granular agreements that account for different operational contexts without writing redundant contracts.

3. Defining the Scope: Linking Agents and Model Cards

The Scope class provides the technical identity of the agreement. It establishes a hierarchical link that moves from a high-level agreement to the specific "nutrition label" of the AI model.

Identity Hierarchy: Scope \rightarrow Agent \rightarrow ModelCard

1. Scope: Defines the boundary of the agreement.
2. Agent: Identifies the autonomous software entity.
3. ModelCard: References a standardized report detailing the model's training data, intended use, and ethical limitations.

The "Prescriptive" Shift: Linking to a ModelCard allows the SLA to be prescriptive rather than just descriptive. Because the Model Card contains data on ethics and provenance, an AgentSLA-aware system can automatically reject an agent if its training data doesn't meet corporate compliance standards before the agent is even engaged.

4. The Logic of Compliance: Qualifying Conditions & SLOs

AgentSLA uses the BoolExpression class to evaluate compliance. This logic is what allows a monitor to programmatically determine if a guarantee is being met. Logic is constructed using three primary types: And, Or, and Comparison.

The Comparison operator is the most critical. It functions using a "Left-Hand Side vs. Right-Hand Side" (LHS vs. RHS) structure:

* LHS (Metric): The actual data being measured (e.g., Accuracy).
* Operator: The relationship (e.g., GREATER, LESS, EQUAL).
* RHS (Value): The numeric threshold defined in the SLO.

Pseudo-Logic Example: IF [QualifyingCondition: InputLanguage EQUAL "English"] THEN [SLO: Accuracy GREATER 0.95]

Why this matters to a developer: This standardized LHS/RHS logic allows for the automatic generation of runtime monitors. You aren't just writing a document; you are generating a set of machine-executable rules.

5. The Vital Signs: QoS Metrics and the AI Factor

AgentSLA extends the ISO/IEC 25010 framework by introducing the QoSMetric class. A defining feature of AI metrics is Uncertainty. Because LLMs are non-deterministic, measurements often have a "wobble." The uncertainty attribute (a float) allows the Comparison logic to account for this margin of error during SLO evaluation.

Metric	ISO Parent Category	Learner's Definition (Standards-Expert View)
TTFT	Time-behavior	Time-To-First-Token: The latency between a request and the first generated token.
Bias	Fairness	Measured as the ratio of successful tests passed using the LangBiTe framework.
Carbon Emissions	Sustainability	The estimated CO2 footprint of the model’s inference impact.
OversightLevel	Autonomy	The degree of human intervention required, as defined by Cihon et al.
Conciseness	Output Properties	Evaluation of the generated output size relative to the prompt requirement.

Why this matters to a developer: Standardized metrics like those from LangBiTe allow for apples-to-apples comparisons between different agent providers, moving beyond vague marketing claims to verifiable data.

6. Advanced Tracking: Derived and Drift Metrics

AI performance is rarely a single data point; it is a trend. AgentSLA handles this through two advanced metric subclasses:

* DerivedQoSMetric: Aggregates data over a specific Window (e.g., the last 10 messages) using an Aggregation Function (e.g., AVG, MED, MIN, MAX).
* QoSDriftMetric: Measures the stability of an agent by evaluating the delta between two windows. It subtracts the average of a previous window (e.g., t-20 to t-10) from the average of the current window (t-10 to t0).

The Speedometer Analogy: A DerivedQoSMetric is your current average speed over the last mile. A QoSDriftMetric is the measurement of your acceleration or deceleration—how much your speed has changed compared to the mile you just finished.

Why this matters to a developer: Drift metrics are early-warning systems. They detect "model decay" or context-window saturation before the AI fails completely.

7. The Blueprint: Reading an AgentSLA JSON Object

To ensure interoperability with protocols like Google's Agent2Agent (A2A), AgentSLA is encoded in JSON. It follows five strict encoding rules:

1. Classes are objects {}.
2. Attributes are key-value pairs.
3. Compositions (containment) nest objects within objects.
4. Multiplicity (>1) uses arrays [].
5. Simple Associations link external objects (like a Provider) by their name string.

Listing 1: Full AgentSLA JSON Structure

{
 "GuaranteeTerm": [{
  "Scope": [{
   "name": "Scope 1",
   "Agent": "Agent 1"
  }],
  "QualifyingCondition": [],
  "SLO": [{
   "name": "SLO 1",
   "BoolExpression": {
    "type": "Comparison",
    "QoSMetric": "AVG TTFT",
    "operator": "LESS",
    "value": 1
   }
  }]
 }],
 "DerivedQoSMetric": [{
  "name": "AVG TTFT",
  "description": "description",
  "metric_type": "TTFT",
  "unit": "sec",
  "uncertainty": 0,
  "window": 10,
  "window_unit": "MESSAGE",
  "aggregation": "AVG",
  "Provider": "Provider 1"
 }],
 "Provider": [{
  "name": "Provider 1",
  "confidence": 0.95,
  "reputation": 50
 }],
 "Agent": [{
  "name": "Agent 1",
  "description": "description text",
  "url": "agent_url",
  "ModelCard": "GPT 4o"
 }],
 "ModelCard": [{
  "name": "GPT 4o",
  "model_card": "..."
 }]
}


Code Annotations:

1. Lines 2–17 (GuaranteeTerm): Defines "Scope 1" and "SLO 1." It mandates that the metric "AVG TTFT" must be LESS than 1 second.
2. Lines 18–28 (DerivedQoSMetric): Defines "AVG TTFT" as a 10-message rolling average. It links to Provider 1 via Rule 5 (Association by name).
3. Lines 29–33 (Provider): Details the source of the measurement, noting a confidence level of 0.95—essential for establishing the reliability of the telemetry.
4. Lines 34–39 (Agent): Identifies "Agent 1" and provides the URL for communication, linking it to its specific intelligence profile.
5. Lines 40–43 (ModelCard): The "GPT 4o" model card. By including this here, the agreement becomes a complete, self-contained audit trail for the AI's behavior and provenance.
